Of course, any complex
application is going to be
a composition of multiple microservices
where some services simply
provide API endpoints for others
to consume and others act as
clients to those services
in chained responses,
chained request response relationships.
Now, we know by now how to
write REST web services,
so microservice applications that
expose REST endpoints to consumers.
Now, how do we write consumers
in our applications?
The client-side API is implemented
using quarkus-rest-client extension,
which is based on RESTEasy.
Actually
RESTEasy being an
open source implementation of
the MicroProfile Rest
Client specification,
it is very easy to use.
You can add the qaurkus-rest-client extension using the
standard quarkus:add-
extension mvn command,
or simply add it to your pom.xml
as a dependency manually.
Now the thing is, for a Quarkus
Rest Clients application to work,
we need to obtain an interface
describing the web service
that we are about to invoke,
that we are about to consume. Generally,
it's a good approach to actually annotate
the microservices web service
implementation in an interface,
and then extend that interface
in an implementation class
without any annotations.
That way it's easier to
create clients by simply
taking the interface class and
putting it next to the client code.
However, it does not have to be
a complete interface definition
of the microservice that
we are about to consume,
just the endpoints that we actually
need, have to be placed into an
interface and annotated properly.
For example, we start by
defining an interface as
opposed to the interface
that would have been
present in the implementation
code of the web service.
We have to add @RegisterRestClient
annotation on top of it and that triggers
the RESTEasy client functionality which
generates a Rest Client on
the fly at compilation time,
thanks to this annotation.
The rest of the interface
can be exactly the
same as the implementation
of the web service
or of course, just the
subset as far as we need.
Now, the path defines where the
requests are going to be sent,
and then all the standard
REST annotations,
such as the sub-directory or sub URL
of the implementation method the Produces,
Consumes annotations, the GET, Post,
Delete, Patch, PUT methods and so on.
And of course, any
parameter annotations that
are already present in the web
service implementation code anyway.
So how do we use that REST
client then in our code.
This is the interface that simply
needs an additional annotation
of register as client.
We can use that client by
injecting it into our client code.
There's a semicolon
missing here at the end.
So simply injecting the RestClient
into a field that matches
the type of the interface
and it's going to be
an actual implementation of the RestClient
that is injected into that field.
Additionally, the class that we are using
the RestClient in, has to be some
sort of CDI bean either with
an explicit scope annotation
or any other annotation that
activates CDI managed bean functionality.
Do bear in mind the scope,
the lifecycle scope of the client class,
we are going to come back to
this in a couple of moments.
Now, once you've injected the client,
you simply use it as if
it was a local method.
So no need to perform any sort of magic,
you will get a functional
REST client injected
into the field and then you simply
use it as if it was a local one.
Now of course it need some
additional configuration
because the client needs
to connect somewhere
and that is performed in the
application.properties file.
There is only one field that needs
to be placed into that file,
which is field that starts with the fully
qualified name of the client class,
so of the interface that we've
added to our application.
Then the /mp-rest/ bit
is literal, hard-coded
and then we have a set of properties of
which only the URL is necessary and it
should point to the base path of
where the rest service is running.
So if, for example,
if the rest service defines slash
expenses contexts that is
going to listen under,
you do not have to specify it
here because it's already
defined in the interface,
so whatever context,
it's listening app is not necessary.
We just need the base path.
We can use that setting
with profiles as well,
so this would be the prod profile
but for dev, of course we will
be using a different endpoint.
For dev
we are going to be defining the
alternative by prefixing the setting with
the percent dev prefix or percent test or
whatever other specific profiles
you have defined and are using.
I have mentioned lifecycle
scope of the client object,
the client class where you actually
consuming the service, the scope property.
So whatever your class's fully
qualified domain name is,
that is the REST client
interface is fully qualified,
name is /mp-rest/scope annotation
defines the injection scope for the
clients that are going to be generated in,
injected into your clients.
Default if you do not
specify this is Dependent,
which means that if you are injecting
REST client implementation into
an applications code being
that client is going to
be used for the remainder of the
lifecycle of the application.
If you are injecting it
into request scope bean,
then after the request had finished,
this client would have
been garbage collected
in the next time, the client code in
your application is invoked, the implementation class,
the implementation object is
going to be injected a fresh.
So it's important in some use cases
that's why we are pointing it out. Now,
it's all nice and easy when you are running
Quarkus instances locally on
your development workstation,
you know which ports have been assigned,
it's easy to configure
the REST client base path by simply
saying localhost port 8075.
In OpenShift Container Platform,
the service discovery is
a little bit different,
but there are 2 options
that we can choose.
So any application running in
OpenShift is useless
unless we create a Kubernetes service
as its load balancing front end.
Because a pod has a shorter life
cycle than the overall application,
pod is just 1 instance of
1 version of 1 collection
of configuration settings.
Every time we change that,
we have to redeploy the pod,
the application lives on.
Kubernetes services, are load
balancing front ends that allow
us to have a stable reference
point to whatever IP the pod has
and however many pods we have,
through that Kubernetes service,
we will be able to land on some pod.
We don't really know which one,
but it essentially load balances incoming
requests across the available
collection of pods.
Now the name of the
Kubernetes service is very
important because it determines
how we are going to connect to it.
The first option of discovering
a Kubernetes service is to use
injected environment variables.
So environment variables
get injected into pods
automatically for all services
that exist in the same project.
For example, if the service
is called calculator,
the environment variable
is going to be called
CALCULATOR_SERVICE_HOST
and CALCULATOR_SERVICE_POST.
So the service,
the CALCULATOR_SERVICE_HOST variable
will contain the IP
address of the service
and of course, the calculator
underscore service port will contain
the port that we need to connect
to be able to use that service.
Since these variables are
already injected into the pod,
you can use them in application.
properties directly by
simply configuring your REST client
with whatever the interface
fully qualified class name is,
/mp-rest/url=http
dollar curly brace CALCULATOR_
SERVICE_HOST closing
curly brace and then colon
and another curly brace for
CALCULATOR_SERVICE_PORT
That is one option.
The other option is actually
much simpler because it
relies on the built-in DNS server
as it's also known SkyDNS.
It's also known the internal
OpenShift DNS server.
It's present in many Kubernetes clusters,
but in all OpenShift deployments as well.
It's only visible to pods
running inside OpenShift,
but thanks to that DNS server,
we can actually treat
a services name as if it was
a host name of that service.
So if we have a calculator service
that is running on port 8080,
we can just simply connect to
http://calculator port 8080.
That is, if the calculator service is
running in the same project,
if it's not running in the same project,
but it's, let's say running in a project called Math,
then we can connect it
by simply referring to
http://calculator.
math:port 8080,
like this.
Because of the configuration
of the pods, both work.
So if the calculator service is
in the same project,
we can use the short name.
If the calculator service is
in another project,
we simply use the project
name as if it was
the domain name of the target service.
Because then you would obviously
apply different settings,
different profiles to the dev and the
prod configuration profiles in
your application properties.
Because in development, in dev mode,
obviously in of course,
in many cases in test mode as well,
you will actually be connecting to
some service running on localhost,
listening on a specific port.
By the way, quarkus.
http.port determines what
port this particular service
that we are configuring in application
properties is going to use.
So this microservice is
listening on port 8085
and then in dev,
our client, our AdderService
will be connecting to
another service running on port 8084.
This is in dev mode because
we are running everything locally.
In production of course we will
be running things in OpenShift,
we will be using port 8080
for both ourselves
and the remote services because those
will have different IP addresses.
And in prod, or you could
even leave out these two,
just use absolute property names.
In prod, we will be connecting to
a Kubernetes service
called adder in this case,
that is listening on port 8080.
Let's have a look at how to implement
these relationships in practice.
Join us in the next video,
which is an exercise.